---
title: "Dumbification of the generation or how I see ChatGPT's impact on society"
description: 'mindless rambling as per usual'
pubDate: 'Nov 11 2024'
tags: ['life']
---


Preamble: I am sorry for this blog(?) being a wall of text, but I just tried to reflect my emotions and thoughts so it just so happened to end up like this. Also please ignore some weird phrasing and other mistakes that i've made, still figuring out serious and non-academic writing thing.

I am one of these (hopefully not) annoying people who used ChatGPT (further shortened to "chat") before boom that happened. I do not remember how I stumbled upon it, but that happened circa november-december 2022. Of course, that is not "I knew about gpt3 before all that hype" kind of thing, but still, earlier than many. When I discovered I just clicked around trying to figure out its limits.


At the time of discovery I had many relatively hard algo problems on one of my courses, so naturally, I tried to see how far it goes with that, and that was not as disappointing as I would expect. Sure, it did solve problems, but had exceptionally hard time fixing problems in the code. To this day I remember all my desperate attempts to solve one stupid algo problem that had some kind of wording issue in the description and nonsensical test cases by trying to feed it into chat - it, too, could not understand problem very well and code passed only a few tests. After my experiments with it I got bored and left it as-is. Then I got news about gpt4 beta testing and got myself an API key somewhere around january 2023. This, too, yielded no particularly good results because I had no use to it after experiencing gpt3 so I left it as-is too. 


But then the hype began. Everyone single person around me was talking about this "AI" that can solve most problems by simply asking it a question. I even remember some sort of hype when some guy boasted that he got gpt4 API key. Now everybody knew what chat is. And guess what? Shortly after, many people that I knew were asking the ever so powerful chat about all their study problems, starting with essays and ending with physics and math problems. I believe that to this day chat is not a good way of solving problems, so you might imagine how bad it was back then. "Oi lad we have <subject> hw and we have to write an essay" - "Ah I don't care, Ill just generate what we need and give that". So as you can imagine most people have now been using this method to solve all their study problems. At that time I did not care much about that - I did not have problems with writing academic essays or any other subject so I did not feel need to fall back to this kind of solution to my problems.


What happens next is an interesting case. Lets skip a portion of my past to the time when I changed the place I was around and met even more people, that is, somewhere around august 2023. I can't say that they people I met very smart, nor can I say that they were hopelessly dumb, just an average person you'd meet. As mentioned, the chat's hype was already there, dumb "AI" startups already started forming so everyone had an idea what is happening. And now imagine a calculus course, just good old boring calculus I, nothing hard, the worst thing you might encounter are recursive integrals or not-so-nice limits. And still, I saw many people use chat to solve problems or attempt to reason concepts with it. Why did they do this? no idea. We had videos of the material that were more than understandable, yet of course they used chat. This baffles me at the very least because this material was somewhat guaranteed to be studied by them in the past, yet it seemed like it was new to them. At this point you might start wondering "okay, but why would you go for some random calculus course as an example and what does it have to do with the title" and you'd be right, for now it is used as an exposition. Now lets skip to the one of the courses I had in particular - statistics.

The statistics course, unlike calculus course that I mentioned above, was not as easy. Of course all "hardness" of the material is subjective, but let's stick to the thought that it was hard for most people. The most problems people had probably had to do with high amount of formulas we were given, but if we ignore that part it is basically "remember a formula, understand how to apply it in 3 cases and you are good". Going further, all our problems we were given were later part of exams that we had, so there were all reasons to solve these problems or at least attempt to understand how they work without trying to understand underlying concept. Now to the fun part. During one of the exams we were allowed to use phones as a calculator. A great setup where nothing can go wrong, right? Of course one guy was caught cheating, and, surprise surprise, he tried to get solutions by asking almighty chat. Now imagine just how dumb this was - you could've cheated by using your solutions from before, which certainly would've helped you, yet you cheated by asking retarded (respectfully) machine how to solve abstract problems. I have no idea what happened to him next, but this gives us a general idea of dumb behavior by relatively sane people.


Now, after that I saw this event happen I started wondering just how bad can it possibly be outside of community that I was in. And I went online. And I saw unfathomable amount of people who worship this machine and rely on it in every scenario. Have some legal problems? Want to find some information online? Have problems with programming? Maybe problems with math? Need some cooking recipes? All these questions have same answer for them - asking the chat. And you have to blame people for this. Blame people for their absolutely lazy and boring approach to life and life choices. Hell, to this day I encounter fanatics that are refusing to think. 

This september and october (2024) I had an unfortunate experience of having to work with a guy in pair during java course. The guy, is here for a reason - he is one of fanatics of the chat. I had no prior experience while he claimed to have some experience from his high school. "Okay", I thought to myself, "this probably should not go as bad given that the new place I am at is pretty good". Oh how wrong I was. This dude had absolutely no will to work on his own, the only thing he was able to do is yap. "Oh but we can do this, oh what about implementing that" yet all his code was lazily generated by some newer openAI model (he even has a subscription!!).  He did not even bother testing if code it works, and mind you, there were tests. After seeing how bad everything goes I just started working on everything alone because this way I don't have to wait for him to finish his part, then refactor half of useless and untested code and then finish own part. But if everything was fine for now, we had to write a game then, where I had almost no chance of finishing alone (because how does one tackle pair assignment that takes few weeks to finish on his own?). And who could've guessed - he once again terrorized chat with questions instead of thinking about code. His entire approach to programming is just "open chat - write problem - see if it works (without thinking about code architecture/future additions) - say that it is done". If code did not work then he spent days debugging something with me having no idea what is happening. As you might imagine, once again, it was easier to double down on work instead of relying on him to do anything. During one of our meetings I just told him "you are unreliable because you are taking too much time to finish things", after which I just started messaging him daily asking about current progress and specifying all requirements so that he and his dumb machine have easier time solving problems that we had.


If you've read this far then you might guess what my position on chat is. I do not think that it is a good tool for people that are cluelessly trying to find an answer to their problem taking no interest in what they are asking. I am not saying that it is bad and you should not use it, no, but I it is simply of no value to me. Most things I am doing in life are programming related, and I'd rather understand things that I am writing instead of relying machine's code that does not work as expected or does not work for me. 
